# Tuesday 2-25-2025

## Hands On RTOS with Microcontrollers

### Chapter 2: Understanding RTOS Tasks

#### Introducing super loop programming
```c
void main( void )
{
    while(1)
    {
        func1();
        func2();
        func3();
    }
}
```
Never returns
This works pretty well when each function returns quickly 
Delay propagates sequentially
There can be a delay between when the event occurs and what it is detected. This delay isn't always consistent. This is called Jitter
If there is a known maximum amount of jitter the system is considered to be deterministic. 

#### Achieving parallel operations with super loops
Interrupt service routine (ISR)
Code inside an ISR is generally kept as short as possible in order to minimize time spent inside the ISR. If code executes for a long time there is a chance the interrupt can be called again before the previous call completes 
One technique is to use the ISR to set a flag that is serviced by the main loop
Ex. ADC sample done triggers ISR to store sample in RAM, set new sample available flag. When func in super loop see flag set it handles the new samples.

Direct memory access (DMA) Can manage storage without intervention by the CPU

Super loops work well until module dependencies/priorities get complex
Ex: high priority data collection, low priority interface

#### Comparing RTOS tasks to super loops
A task is just another main loop with it's own stack, and a priority

#### Achieving parallel operations with RTOS tasks
```c
Task1()
{
    while(1)
    {
        // Do thing
    }
}

Task2()
{
    while(1)
    {
        // Do thing
    }
}

Task3()
{
    while(1)
    {
        // Do thing
    }
}

main()
{
    createTask1(&Task1);
    createTask2(&Task2);
    createTask3(&Task3);
    StartScheduler();
}
```

Round robin scheduling: each task gets a small slice of time to run. as long as there is work to do the task will execute. Each task is given a fair share

Preemptive based scheduling: system is always performing the most important task

#### RTOS tasks v super loops - pros and cons
Super loops are great for simple systems. Interrupts can help as the system becomes more complex, but when jitter becomes too much a more advanced solution is required
ROM, RAM, and initial setup time is the trade of for an RTOS